“My mother is dead, I want to go and see her.” These were the words of a five-year old boy after witnessing her mother being allegedly stabbed by her boyfriend.
The 21-year-old Mpumalanga law student, Treasure Ndlovu, survived the ordeal, but she now fears for her life after the man accused of assaulting her was released on bail, despite violating a previous protection order against him.
Ndlovu had just fetched her five-year old son from school when she was accosted by her knife wielding former boyfriend who allegedly severely assaulted her and slashed her throat with the knife.
“At first, he grabbed my son’s foot and lifted him with his head facing down. He asked, ‘who’s child is this?’ I was scared that he would drop him on his head, and I dashed to protect my child, but then he repeatedly assaulted me and stabbed me with his knife,” said Ndlovu.
Mpumalanga police spokesman, Sgt. Gerald Sedibe confirmed that a man has been arrested for the incident.
“I can confirm that a 23 year-old male by the name of Aubrey Sphamandla Malaza was arrested and charged with assault with intent to do grievous bodily harm as well as violation of a protection order. He was granted bail when he appeared in court,” said Sedibe.
Sedibe did not want to comment on the granting of bail because that’s the decision of the National Prosecuting Authority.
He also said that the nature of the charges usually take into consideration a variety of factors, including the severity of the injuries and the doctor’s report.
He said that Malaza’s first court appearance was in absentia because angry students who witnessed the incident had allegedly assaulted him and he ended up in hospital.
Ndlovu has had been granted a protection order against Malaza, after he allegedly attacked and took her cellphone and books on 10 July.
He allegedly smashed the phone and tore the books and wrote a note that the five-year-old was not his son.
Ndlovu is currently recuperating at her home in the village of Nyongani near Hazyview with a huge scar around her neck and a gash behind her left ear, and can’t go to school.
“There are assignments that are due, but I cannot do them because I’m confined to the bed,” she told Ziwaphi.
She said she was still puzzled why her ex-boyfriend attacked her.
Her son is still undergoing counselling following the ordeal.
“When I woke up in hospital they told me that my son was telling them that I had died and that he wanted to see me,” said Ndlovu.
Malaza will be appearing in court again on 24 August 2018 and SACP will be organising a protest action in support of Ndlovu.
“We cannot tolerate this sort of behaviour in our community, more especially on the eve of Women’s Month. We are going to paint that magistrate court red in solidarity with this young woman and to send a message that this community will not be spectators when such heinous crimes are being committed against one of their own,” said SACP branch secretary, Raymond Mhlaba.
Facebook0Google+TwitterLinkedInWhatsAppFacebook MessengerShare